AI tooltips (#2915)
MultiQC/MultiQC: docs/markdown/ai/index.md

---
title: AI Summaries
description: Using AI to summarise MultiQC reports
---

> # AI Summaries

Reviewer: Not sure that it was an intentional choice. We have done similar for other features like _Custom Content_ in other places, but done so inconsistently.

I'm inclined to say that we should not, and use lower case `summaries`. It looks a little odd with the all-caps `AI` but I think it's probably better. I'll update it now.

MultiQC v1.27 onwards can generate AI-powered summaries of your reports. These can be created at two points:

> - When creating the report (baked into the report HTML)

Reviewer 2: Per Google Developer Style theoretically we're avoiding parentheticals. In practice no one does this but me.

Reviewer: I'll update to remove, though feel free to suggest a different alternative @jason-seqera

> - Dynamically in the browser, whilst viewing an existing HTML report (ephemeral)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Dynamically in the browser, while viewing an existing HTML report (ephemeral)
```

The AI summaries are generated using LLMs (large-language models) AI, using
[Seqera AI](https://seqera.io/ask-ai/), [OpenAI](https://openai.com/) or [Anthropic](https://www.anthropic.com/).
MultiQC reports also have an option to copy a prompt to your clipboard, to paste into any provider you have access to.

:::warning

> Never rely on AI-generated summaries. Whilst these summaries can be useful to get you started quickly with a report, they may give inaccurate analysis and miss important details.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Never rely on AI-generated summaries. While these summaries can be useful to get you started quickly with a report, an AI-generated summary might output inaccurate analysis and miss important details.
```

:::

> :::note

Reviewer 2: Having competing notes makes the page content kind of busy. I dunno if we can either consolidate or incorporate some of this into the body itself? Maybe the `:::note` is okay as body content?

Reviewer: Will switch this to body content 👍🏻

AI summaries work by sending report data to an LLM provider of your choice, via an API over the internet.
Be aware of what data you are sending, and to who.

> Read more about privacy any Seqera AI [here](https://seqera.io/ai-trust/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For more information, see [Seqera AI: Your privacy matters](https://seqera.io/ai-trust/).
```

:::

## Choosing a provider

To use native summary generation, MultiQC needs to communicate with an LLM provider's API.
All three supported services require an API key to work.

:::info

Seqera AI is free to use, though there are usage limits.

> OpenAI / Anthropic API usage is billed based on consumption.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use of OpenAI and Anthropic APIs are billed by their respective providers based on consumption.
```

:::

> 1. [Seqera AI](https://seqera.io/ask-ai/)

Reviewer 2: So I'm not sure I'd number this list; It looks like the user needs to sign up for all 4, but isn't it either/or?

Reviewer: Updated 👍🏻

   - Register for free at [seqera.io](https://seqera.io/)

>    - Create a new key on the _"User tokens"_ page: [https://cloud.seqera.io/tokens](https://cloud.seqera.io/tokens)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - Create a new key on the **Access tokens** page: [https://cloud.seqera.io/tokens](https://cloud.seqera.io/tokens)
```

2. [OpenAI](https://openai.com/)

>    - Register at [platform.openai.com](https://platform.openai.com/signup) (NB: different to ChatGPT)

Reviewer 2: Don't forget to finalize this.

   - Add a payment method to your account to enable API usage beyond any trial credits

>    - Create a new secret key on the _API Keys_ section [under your profile](https://platform.openai.com/api-keys)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - Create a new secret key on the **API Keys** section [under your profile](https://platform.openai.com/api-keys)
```

3. [Anthropic](https://www.anthropic.com/)
   - Sign up at [https://console.anthropic.com](https://console.anthropic.com)
   - Add a payment method to enable API access

>    - Create a new key on on the _API Keys_ section in your [account settings](https://console.anthropic.com/settings/keys)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - Create a new key on on the **API Keys** section in your [account settings](https://console.anthropic.com/settings/keys)
```

4. Any other provider, via your clipboard
   - You can use buttons in MultiQC reports to copy a prompt to your clipboard,
     in order to manually summarise report data.
     See [Copying prompts](#copying-prompts) for instructions.

:::note

> Treat your API keys like passwords, and do not share them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Treat your API keys like passwords and do not share them.
```

:::

### Choosing a model

If you're using OpenAI or Anthropic you can choose the exact model used for report summaries.
This is done by setting `ai_model` in the MultiQC config.

- Anthropic model names must begin with `claude`

>   - Default: `claude-3-5-sonnet-latest`. Tested with Sonnet 3.5 and Haiku 3.5. See the [Anthropic docs](https://docs.anthropic.com/en/docs/intro-to-claude#model-options).

Reviewer 2: Unbalanced bullets are always a bit odd. Can this be rolled up into the parent bullet?

Reviewer: I'm not sure I understand what you mean by "unbalanced bullets"?

I've altered to split this line into two bullets, one for the default, one for the extra detail. Shout if you have an alternative suggestion.

- OpenAI model names must being with `gpt`
  - Default: `gpt-4o`. Tested with GPT-4o and GPT-4o-mini. See the [OpenAI docs](https://platform.openai.com/docs/models).

> This model will then be used during report generation and also set as the default toolbox panel setting for browser report summaries.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This model is used during report generation and also set as the default toolbox panel setting for browser report summaries.
```

## Summaries during report generation

MultiQC can generate AI summaries at run time, when generating reports.

> Summary text will be included within the report HTML as static text and will be visible to anyone viewing the report,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Summary text is included within the report HTML as static text and will be visible to anyone viewing the report,
```

however it is shared.

AI summaries are disabled by default when running MultiQC.
To generate them, you must enable them either on the command line or via a MultiQC config file.

> 1. Command line flags:

Reviewer 2: Does it make sense to use bullets instead? This is either/or?

>    - `--ai` / `--ai-summary`: Generate a short report summary and put it on top of the report (fast)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - `--ai` / `--ai-summary`: Generate a short report summary and put it at the beginning of the report (fast)
```

   - `--ai-summary-full`: Generate a detailed version of the summary with analysis and recommendations (slower)

>    - `--ai-provider <provider>`: Choose AI provider. `seqera`, `openai` or `anthropic`. Default `seqera`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - `--ai-provider <provider>`: Choose AI provider. One of `seqera`, `openai` or `anthropic`. Default `seqera`
```

   - `--no-ai`: Disable AI toolbox and buttons in the report

> 2. Alternatively, MultiQC configuration file:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. MultiQC configuration file:
```

   ```yaml
   ai_summary: false # Set to true for short summaries
   ai_summary_full: false # Set to true for  long summaries
   ai_provider: "seqera" # 'seqera', 'openai' or 'anthropic'. Default: 'seqera'
   no_ai: false # Set to true to disable AI toolbox and buttons in the report
   ```

> You will need to set your provider's API key in an environment variable in order to access its service

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You must set your provider's API key in an environment variable in order to access its service
```

_(see [Choosing a provider](#choosing-a-provider) for how to get an API key)_.
The API keys are supplied by setting the following environment variables:

```bash
export SEQERA_ACCESS_TOKEN="..."  # or TOWER_ACCESS_TOKEN
export OPENAI_API_KEY="..."
export ANTHROPIC_API_KEY="..."
```

If you run MultiQC without the appropriate key you will get a warning printed to the console,
but report generation will otherwise proceed without the summary. MultiQC will not return an error exit code.

> :::tip

Reviewer 2: Lots of notes and tips stacked together starts to get very busy. If possible, maybe some of this can be rolled up into the body?

Reviewer: I'll move the `note` into body below. I quite like this as a `tip` because it is just that, it's not directly related to the main content.

Any MultiQC config option can also be set using environment variables
(see [Config with environment variables](../getting_started/config.md#config-with-environment-variables)),
so you can set up everything this way:

```bash
export MULTIQC_AI_SUMMARY=1
export SEQERA_ACCESS_TOKEN="..."
```

:::

MultiQC uses the [python-dotenv](https://saurabh-kumar.com/python-dotenv/) package,
so you can also use an `.env` file either in the current working directory or the MultiQC source code directory.

:::note

Environment variables will only be used for `--ai-summary`/`--ai-summary-full` generation.
They are not saved by MultiQC and cannot be used for in-browser summary generation, within reports.

:::

## In-browser AI Summaries

In addition to summaries during report generation, MultiQC can also create summaries dynamically in reports.

> This can be useful as the person viewing a report is often different to the person who generated it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This can be useful as the person viewing a report is often different than the person who generated it.
```

> Summaries can be generated on demand, when needed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Summaries can be generated on demand when needed.
```

> The AI toolbox and _Summarize_ buttons are shown by default in all reports. To prevent this, run MultiQC with the `--no-ai` flag.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The AI toolbox and **Summarize** buttons are shown by default in all reports. To prevent this, run MultiQC with the `--no-ai` flag.
```

> This can be done on a per-user basis by selecting _Remove AI buttons_ in the _AI Provider_ dropdown in the AI toolbox.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This can be done on a per-user basis by selecting **Remove AI buttons** in the **AI Provider** dropdown in the AI toolbox.
```

> Summaries generated in reports are _ephemeral_ - that is, they are not saved in the HTML.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Summaries generated in reports are _ephemeral_ and are not saved in the HTML.
```

If you generate a summary and share the report then others will not see it.
MultiQC tries to save the summary response within your browser's [local storage](https://www.w3schools.com/html/html5_webstorage.asp)

> so that it shows the next time you open the same report, but this process is imperfect and may not always work.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
so that it shows the next time you open the same report, but this process is imperfect and might not always work.
```

### Configuring the AI provider

> <div style={{float:"right"}}>

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure this actually works in Dinosaur.

Reviewer: Renders fine for me locally?

![ai_summarize_report](../../../docs/images/ai_toolbox_icon.png)

</div>

When you first try to generate a summary in the browser, you must supply the LLM provider's API key.
Open the AI settings by clicking the icon in the toolbox:

Then, choose an AI provider and enter the relevant API key
_(see [Choosing a provider](#choosing-a-provider) for how to get an API key)_.

:::info

> API keys will be stored only in your browser's local storage, so will not be shared with anyone if you send the HTML report to someone else.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
API keys are stored only in your browser's local storage and are not shared with anyone if you send the HTML report to someone else.
```

They are used to send report data directly to your AI provider of choice.

:::

![ai_summarize_report_toolbox_keys](../../../docs/images/ai_toolbox_keys.png)

### Summarising the report

> Once your provider API key is configured, click _"Summarize report"_ to generate an overview summary of the entire report.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once your provider API key is configured, click **Summarize report** to generate an overview summary of the entire report.
```

:::info

The summary text is interactive! Click an underlined sample name to highlight that sample throughout the report.

:::

![ai_summarize_report_toolbox](../../../docs/images/ai_toolbox.png)

### Section-level summaries

Besides a global report-level AI summary, you can generate a summary for each plot or table separately using buttons next to each section:

![ai_summarize_buttons](../../../docs/images/ai_summarize_buttons.png)

> You can also copy the entire prompt that MultiQC would use to generate a summary. Using the toolbox, you can enable the "Copy prompt" buttons to be shown next to each "Summarize" button:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can also copy the entire prompt that MultiQC would use to generate a summary. Using the toolbox, you can enable the **Copy prompt** buttons to be shown next to each **Summarize** button:
```

![ai_toolbox_copy_checkbox](../../../docs/images/ai_toolbox_copy_checkbox.png)

![ai_copy_buttons](../../../docs/images/ai_copy_buttons.png)

> A button will copy the LLM-friendly formatted report data along with the system prompt into your clipboard, which you can then paste into your an AI chat interace of your provider of choice.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A button will copy the LLM-friendly formatted report data along with the system prompt into your clipboard, which you can then paste into your an AI chat interface of your provider of choice.
```

### Copying prompts

If you have access to an LLM that is not directly supported by MultiQC, you can copy the exact prompt

> that MultiQC uses to your clipboard. This can be pasted into whatever you have access to.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
that MultiQC uses to your clipboard. This can be pasted into whatever LLM that you have access to.
```

> To do this, click the "Copy prompt" button in the toolbox:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To do this, click the **Copy prompt** button in the toolbox:
```

![ai_toolbox_copy_button](../../../docs/images/ai_toolbox_copy_button.png)

## Context window

A context window refers to the amount of text (in tokens) that an AI model can consider at once
when processing input and generating responses, encompassing both the input prompt and the output.

> At the time of writing, modern LLMs typically have a context window size in 128k - 200k tokens,

Reviewer 2: Ranges with numbers: https://developers.google.com/style/units-of-measure#ranges-of-numbers-with-units

> At the time of writing, modern LLMs typically have a context window size in 128k - 200k tokens,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At the time of writing, modern LLMs typically have a context window size in 128-200k tokens,
```

> which translates to about 100k - 160k characters of report data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
which translates to about 100-160k characters of report data.
```

> That means that very large reports - of thousands of samples - might not fit in the available LLM context window.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
That means that very large reports, of thousands of samples, might not fit in the available LLM context window.
```

MultiQC uses the following logic, moving on to the next step if the prompt is still too large:

1. Attempt to include all report data in the prompt.
2. Include just the general statistics table.
3. Include the general statistics table, without hidden-by-default columns.
4. Abort AI summary.

> If you're struggling to generate an AI summary, you can try the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you're unable to generate an AI summary, you can try the following:
```

- Hide additional columns in the general statistics table (see [Hiding Columns](../reports/customisation.md#hiding-columns)).
- Hide General statistics data in the browser, and request the AI summary dynamically:

>   - Hide columns with the "Configure columns" button

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Hide columns with the **Configure columns** button
```

  - Filter shown samples dynamically with the toolbox

> - Copy the prompt from `multiqc_data/multiqc_ai_prompt.txt` or into clipboard with the "Copy prompt" button in the toolbox, and use it with extrenal services with a larger context window.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Copy the prompt from `multiqc_data/multiqc_ai_prompt.txt` into clipboard with the **Copy prompt** button in the toolbox, and use it with external services with a larger context window.
```

## Configuring within Nextflow

If you're running MultiQC within a Nextflow pipeline, you probably don't want to edit the workflow code to configure AI summaries.

> Most nf-core pipelines with MultiQC have a `--multiqc_config` option to provide additional YAML config for MultiQC.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Most nf-core pipelines with MultiQC have a `--multiqc_config` option to provide an additional YAML config for MultiQC.
```

> However, because API keys must be passed using environment variables anyway, the recommended method is to use

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, because API keys must be passed using environment variables, the recommended method is to use
```

environment vars for everything.

Using this approach means that no pipeline code needs adjustment, only a small addition to the Nextflow config
by using the [`env` config scope](https://nextflow.io/docs/latest/reference/config.html#env).

For example, to use with OpenAI you would set the following in your Nextflow config:

```groovy
env {
   MULTIQC_AI_SUMMARY_FULL = 1              // Enable long summaries during report generation
   MULTIQC_AI_PROVIDER = "openai"           // Select OpenAI as provider
   OPENAI_API_KEY = secrets.OPENAI_API_KEY  // Access key for OpenAI
}
```

> The relevant environment variables are [described above](#summaries-during-report-generation).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The relevant environment variables are described in [Summaries during report generation](#summaries-during-report-generation).
```

:::note

> The above example uses [Nextflow Secrets](https://nextflow.io/docs/latest/secrets.html)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the previous example, [Nextflow Secrets](https://nextflow.io/docs/latest/secrets.html) are used.
```

> The above example uses [Nextflow Secrets](https://nextflow.io/docs/latest/secrets.html)

Reviewer 2: Google Developer Style recommends avoiding directional terms, above, below, ect. We don't really do this in practice, but it's worth the attempt I think.

to securely manage your API keys outside of your config file.
To add this Nextflow secret you would run the following command in the terminal:

```bash
$ nextflow secrets set OPENAI_API_KEY "xxxx"
```

:::

:::tip

Add this config to `~/.nextflow/config` and it will be applied to every Nextflow pipeline you launch.

:::

### Using Seqera Platform

> If using Seqera Platform the above config can be used when launching pipelines or adding them to the launchpad.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If using Seqera Platform, the previously described config can be used when launching pipelines or adding them to the Launchpad.
```

Reviewer 2: We seem to capitalize _Launchpad_ elsewhere.

> However, environment variables can also be added at _Compute Environment_ level and will then affect every pipeline

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, environment variables can also be added at the _Compute Environment_ level and then affects every pipeline
```

run using that CE, without further modification.

> This effectively means that provider API keys can be managed at workspace level.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This effectively means that provider API keys can be managed at the workspace level.
```

Reviewer 2: Considering linking to Workspace discussion in Platform docs.

> To do this, toggle the _"Environment variables"_ section when creating a Compute Environment and click _"Add variable"_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To do this, toggle the **Environment variables** section when creating a Compute Environment and select **Add variable**.
```

> Make sure that the _"Target environment"_ has _"Compute job"_ toggled on.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Ensure that the **Target environment** has **Compute job** enabled.
```

![Seqera Platform: Setting environment variables at CE level](../../../docs/images/ai_seqera_platform_env_var_create.png)

Once added:

![Seqera Platform: Setting environment variables at CE level](../../../docs/images/ai_seqera_platform_env_vars.png)

> ## Security Considerations

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Security considerations
```

MultiQC AI summaries are used at your own risk.

> Please treat results with appropriate mistrust and consider what data you are sending to external services.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Treat results with appropriate mistrust and consider what data you are sending to external services.
```
